what a real charon
had to do in central america
why the minister of defense of israel
will go to central america why central
america is so far from israel
but why aren't going to central america
israel receives more u.s military aid
than any other nation
yet israel itself has a thriving arms
industry
its military exports have at least
doubled every two years since
1969. israel is now the world's seventh
largest arms merchant
and is a major arms supplier to central
america
specifically to guatemala honduras el
salvador and costa rica i'm jane hunter
israeli defense minister ariel sharon's
trip to honduras last december
and subsequent reports of secret deals
inspired this program
there were many answers to the most
basic questions about the quantity
quality and meaning of israel's presence
in central america
israel's decision following the 1967 war
to develop a domestic arms industry and
reduce its dependence on arms from
abroad
led to a search for export markets with
increasing frequency customers were
found among the world's most notorious
right-wing governments
arnaldo ramos diplomatic representative
of el salvador's democratic
revolutionary front
after the carter human rights policy
which forced military right wings to
look for arms
elsewhere from the united states israel
became one of the major suppliers
especially to nicaragua
somosa to the guatemalan regime up to
today especially and also
to the sacrament regime after the civil
war
began openly in 79 according to
stockholm peace research institute
israel has been supplying
four-fifths of the sabbath military's
arms
they include this is after the civil war
began they include 25
arava short takeoff and landing tactical
transport
aircraft 18 refurbished assault
uragan fighter bombers six overhauled
aerospacial
fuga magister trainers and large
quantities of buses of machine guns and
galilean
assault rifles the
plo in ambassador to nicaragua reported
that about a hundred israeli military
specialists were training
the salvatorian army and air force
encountered insurgency and weapon
maintenance at a base and 20 miles from
salvador in a close military area
and to understand the role of israel
recently
el salvador you have to also find out
what is going on in honduras which more
and more is the
counter-insurgency regional base aimed
at nicaragua against anderista regime
and aimed at us in el salvador in 1981
the financial times of london estimated
that 300 000
roughly one-fourth of israel's labor
force were employed in defense-related
jobs
this information is included in an
article about the intention of newly
appointed defense minister sharon
to take control of the defense industry
boosting both exports and political
benefits for israel
arnon hadar israeli-born economist and
editor of solidarity publications sees
additional consequences
israel in 77
had military exports of in the
neighborhood a little bit above
400 million dollars in 1980 it was 1.4
billion dollars
today probably it's in the neighborhood
of 1.8 billion dollars
it's fluctuates between 25 and 40 of all
israeli exports
it becomes a major industry in israel
especially in metallurgy
and electronics and
then it may imply something about the
the
economic viability of israel because if
this process continues
then one day israel would not be able to
do without military production
and that is very very important
internally i mean it determines
the economic path that israel may take
or it determines also the relative
power of the value sectors in israel in
the
army and ex-generals the next coroners
would slowly slowly take
hold also of the economic aspect of
israel not only the military aspect
mark allen for 12 years the foreign
editor of people's world newspaper had a
further comment on israel's aspirations
as sharon has stated on many occasions
to show that in fact
israel is not merely a strong
uh military country within the middle
east but in fact possesses the potential
to be a superpower
which is uh i think is overstated
but it is definitely sharon's view and
this is one way of proving it supporters
of israel's arms trade
argue that willingness to sell the
world's most recently battle-tested
weapons
to some of the world's most right-wing
regimes might help to allay
anti-semitism
a recent miami-herald article however
suggested
that future loss of markets is
inevitable as israel's right-wing
clients give way
through revolutions or elections to more
popular governments that will resent
israel's aid to their opponents arnon
hadar
the contradiction between israel role as
a country which
which has economic interests and
a country whose major the major element
of which is jews
and the assumptions that israel is among
other things
supposed to protect jews in the world in
general these
contradictions would develop and has
been developing in many different
directions and one of them which will
develop in the future
will be in latin america where
as more and more liberation movements
would
win then because of israel's past
policy of supplying arms always to the
to the military regimes
then they would run into open conflicts
with these regimes like
the sandinista which would later of
course be interpreted
as pro plo regimes rather than regimes
that naturally react to israel
supplies of arms to to their
previous military regimes as the cause
i think that it is simply a shows a
contradiction of
israel foreign and internal policy in
general
the commodity denominator of all the
regimes that it supplies arms to
from the shah to argentina as we say
south africa uganda uh
guatemala etc it supplies arms to
regimes that
have very strong inclination to become
also anti-semitic
questions about the precise relationship
of u.s and israeli roles in central
america breed more questions
it's believed that a 1981 secret
agreement between
israel and the united states included
the opportunity for israel to supply
arms on behalf of the united states
and it's known that when the u.s
congress forced a halt to el salvador's
military aid in 1981
israel complied with a reagan
administration request
and sent el salvador 21 million dollars
in aid
israeli cabinet minister yaakov meridor
had this message for the united states
do not compete against us in the
caribbean or in
any other country where you can't
operate in the open
give us the ammunition and military
hardware let israel act as your agent
on december 17th leslie gelb in the new
york times quoted a high
state department official with this
comment on washington's attitude
toward israel's activities in central
america
we've indicated we're not unhappy
they're helping out but i wouldn't say
we and the israelis have figured out
together what to do
there might be some truth to that
according to various reports the visit
of charon to honduras came as a surprise
to the state department
on december 19th the new york times
reported that charon had appealed to the
reagan administration
to help finance central american
purchases of israeli arms
the deal was to allow guatemala and
honduras to spend part of their american
military aid called foreign military
sales
credits on israeli weapons francisco
guerra iguera
for 19 years an officer in the
salvadoran army
served as undersecretary of the interior
in the 1979 junta
he later fled for his life charon visit
to central america and he would
just but confirm our fears
in the sense that the president israeli
administration is committed to to
provide support to
to this dictatorial regime in sanborn
and to the proxy regime in honduras
if u.s military is cut off
in el salvador be sure that the israelis
have already
taken care of taking over right very
very smoothly
okay be sure that this visit
of toronto central america is geared to
that
what a real charon had to do
in central america see
what is israel if israel has
those supposed to be big and
terrible or whatever you want to call
them problems
in you know with its neighbors okay
why the minister of defense okay
of israel okay okay we'll go to central
america
why central america is so far from
israel
okay okay it would make sense to have
ariel charon you see going to
egypt you see to to to hold back the
talks with
with the ghm president okay but why
aren't you on going to central america
of course you wouldn't use i mean you
could you could
say that he wanted to reassure
those regimes that that if the
the usa military aide fades out okay
israel will take cover mark vanderhout
a member of the national lawyers guild
and chair of the guilds committee on
refugees
visited guatemala in 1979.
at that time the carter administration
denied u.s arms to guatemala
and you could walk around and see
israeli-made machine guns
all over the place that the army was
carrying at that point in time and a lot
of the
trade union people that we met with we
were invited down by the trade union
sectors to
specifically investigate repression
against the trade union movement
talk to us about how israel had stepped
in and all the arms were coming now
into guatemala from israel
and they could ignore really united
states warnings because israel was
filling that gap and
and it seemed to us that we had no
evidence at that point in time that that
was
fine with the united states also the
united states is still seeing as the
primary
force intervening in central america
there's no doubt about that it's yankee
imperialism
throughout is what is being talked about
people do recognize also the role that
israel
is playing and people do realize the
united states wants to in the one hand
keep its hands
somewhat clean and and have israel
supply a lot of the arms it's a dual
effort
in my opinion it's definitely a
coordinated effort
arnaldo ramos of the fdr sees a more
direct
connection they'd have become a very
important instrument of united states
foreign policy goals
both in south africa and in latin
america
we will put the role within that global
structure
and of course the united states always
claims that
they cannot say detect the armed flows
of israel to
to these countries or that they they say
they cannot prevent them which is
totally hypocritical
especially in the light that the united
states seems to be very very effective
at
detecting arm flows from socialist
countries
even when they do not exist only one
word could stop israel from supplying
those weapons to the violent
dictatorships
and people oftentimes forget in this
country that
israel supported samosa to
the in nicaragua to the very very best
moment of his downfall and he was
israeli weaponry
and training the one that allows samosa
to carry on
such a huge destruction of the economic
infrastructure of the country
and we actually believe that was done on
purpose and the united states know it
but by destroying the economic
infrastructure
of nicaragua it was going to make it
extremely difficult for the new
uh government to sandwich the government
to recover
and it would make it a lot easier for
the united states to conduct the
policy of economic in the sterilization
as they're doing today
and so you see how beautifully
israel plays alongside in the interest
of the united states also you have to
conclude that the
huge amount of economic military aid
that the united states sends to israel
is precisely so that israel can play
this role
it's all intimately connected linked
and and the american people are really
paying
for the israelis
to play that global that global role
as the united states keeps gets more and
more involved in central america and its
international public opinion and our
public opinion in this country
begin to put more and more pressure the
role of israel will increase
inevitably and
if the prison policies for example of
this administration continue in central
america it's certainly going to become
an international conflict
that will see israel that actually
involved arnold haddad does not see
israel's role in any one country is
being pivotal
but he believes that with the growing
trend toward regionalization
that could change as an overall
evaluation i don't think that it is very
significant i don't think that the
israeli presence in central america had
a significant effect on the
salvadoran conflict i do not think so
i think that in the long run
in the dynamics of central america if it
is true that the regional aspect of the
conflict in central america
is going to be more and more pervasive
than by strengthening the guatemalan
armed forces
you strengthen the militaries
in the area visa is opposition and in
that sense israel
may play a crucial role because if you
strengthen
the military honduras costa rica
and guatemala and if the war become
regionalized that is to say the
conflict in el salvador is affected and
affect emerging or existing conflicts in
other countries
then it slowly slowly becomes a war
between the armies on the one side
hand and say at least oppositions on the
other hand
as israeli weapons have become more and
more powerful and sophisticated
messengers of death
they've been employed in more and more
places where death is planned
moral and political questions about who
is on the receiving end of these
armaments tend not to get asked
if you deal with enemies of humanity you
become one
then whoever doesn't need your guns will
not buy you flowers
either this by amos kennan israeli
novelist and columnist in the nation
december 4th
mark vanderhout when the people in those
movements talk about
israel it's it's a completely different
feeling from the
population of the united states which
still has this image of israel
as the blessing for the middle east
a progressive country maybe with some
few aberrations here and there
but basically a model to be looked at
it's not true at all in the third world
or in central america which i'm most
familiar with
where israel is viewed like south africa
as one of the most
really repressive regimes in the world
and one of the most reactionary and one
that will support someone like samosa
and
and we'll sell arms to the guatemalan
dictatorships and we'll sell arms
wherever they can
jane rasmussen who visited honduras in
november of last year with the national
lawyers guild fact-finding team
relates a poignant detail of her
conversations with salvador and refugees
in the mesa grande camp
these people are just sitting ducks i
mean they said here we are we're
surrounded by barbed wires there's
soldiers all around us
all we've got are our machetes what are
we to do
they were very aware of the
massacres that had happened in the
palestinian camps in beirut
and definitely saw the analogy between
the situation of the palestinian camps
in beirut
and uh and the vulnerability that
they're
uh experiencing now in uh
in honduras while israel's arms sales
have gone all but unnoticed
they have been documented it's not so
easy to document the operations of
israeli intelligence forces in central
america
arnaldo ramos fdr diplomatic
representative
they are playing a bigger and bigger
role inevitably
at the level of intelligence of course
their major role in san salvador in the
cities is in the detection
of monitoring and detection of uh
suspected people for example
supplying very sophisticated technology
that detects the number of phone calls
made if there are too many phone calls
too much electricity using the telephone
that
the telephone becomes right away suspect
of being
used by the revolution areas
they use very sophisticated electronic
equipment to
monitor the presence of people on the
street for example they block
periodically several downtown areas and
they take the ideas of people just to
check
who are they if they find that the
person has
is happens to be in downtown in an area
where he's not supposed to
um too often during the week that right
away it makes him
a suspect they usually you know computer
since the years of vietnam the united
states
was legally
forbidden to train police forces in
around from from around the world all of
those roles that
with this limitation what more those
roles are played by israel
lou wolfe editor of covert action
information bulletin has heard about a
similar computer system installed by
israel
in guatemala city from my understanding
of what the
program is in guatemala and as i say it
still needs to be researched further
it's in the range of in the
context of gathering raw intelligence
about
and collating all the raw intelligence
available about
all kinds of people across the political
spectrum in guatemala
but generally directed at people on the
to the left of center
uh to gather every kind of intelligence
uh imaginable about their lifestyle
about their
um people that they're in touch with
the all the things that make up a
person's
daily life and this this information is
placed in a computerized
data bank which is then
used to build dossiers on those
individuals and
it's quite frightening really how this
this could be used
former colonel guerra iguera saw israeli
advisors in el salvador during the 70s
can talk about
what i knew about israeli
participation before romero was deposed
i knew very well you know because of the
fact that i was in the mediterranean
okay and i had access to some things
anyways
and i knew that there were some israeli
advisors you see that were helping
romero secret police in el salvador
called
and cesaro they were very active
at the time you see and i never heard
that those uh advisors left
at salvo okay and when you noticed that
you had a real charon visiting honduras
especially after the the massacres in in
chateau in lebanon right
what can you expect about the i mean
israeli intelligence presence in
ensemble
and keep in mind that they are now more
active because
he or they knew that the pielo was
supporting uh
to the popular moment in the southwest
so
uh i bet that a real charon
you know will increase the punishment
you see of the popular movement you know
through his advisor okay to his advisors
because of the fact you see that the
pll was supporting the popular movement
and of course that the papillonial salvo
was providing
moral support to the piano gary igera
later told me that roberto
dobusson presently speaker of the
national assembly was a minor officer in
romero's secret police onsell
this connection becomes significant when
considering the recent rebellion of
salvadoran general ochoa
a dobisson the christian science monitor
of december 13th says that although
ochoa is highly praised by his u.s
trainers he takes a rather dim view of
them when compared to the israelis
the article further states that ochoa
thinks it totally inappropriate to train
salvadoran troops in the u.s
don't forget they lost the war in
vietnam he says
ochoa credits his training in israel and
by israeli advisors in el salvador in
the mid 70s
for his personal development lou wolf
concludes
so it's not unlikely that that
tabwisson and some of his colleagues
one of whom apparently is ochoa
have ties to to israel and particularly
to mossad
the time that ochoa
was trying to bring general garcia down
the cia was actively interested in
in that particular uh enterprise
and of course now we understand why
because uh
okay his allegiance was not as much as
they had thought to the united states
the u.s movement against intervention in
central america is growing
who will protest in israel benjamin
beidhalami an israeli professor and
editor writing in the new york times
states
there is virtually no israeli opposition
to this global adventurism
there is no human rights lobby there are
no angry editorials or demonstrations
the peace now movement would not dream
of protesting israeli involvement in
guatemala
as far as the israeli public is
concerned this is a non-issue
indeed many israelis feel that their
support for united states interests
around the world should earn them
special consideration from washington
and the american public igal aarons an
israeli citizen and presently a graduate
student in the united
states told me that recently a
representative of the fdr went to israel
he was unsuccessful in persuading
israeli liberals or leftists
to give any attention to this issue
irons is not
optimistic i mean frankly i i i find it
quite difficult to believe this has come
up
as a serious issue with a lot of action
on it in israel right now i mean
up to now it seems to me that the
peace movement here the
anti-interventionist movement hasn't
really
dealt with the question of israel and
its support of
latin american dictatorships at all as
far as israel goes
the peace movement such that exists
there deals with
what's they find much more pressing and
probably good justification which is the
question of the war
between israel and the palestinians and
the other countries around them
and uh they've very very rarely
even mentioned israeli support
for fascism regimes in central america
mark allen of people's world hopes there
will be a change
once the israeli people have been able
to break out of the shackles
of thinking that my government right or
wrong then i think that the
quest for democracy
and the progressive vision that was
supposed to be behind the creation of
the state of israel itself
will come into being and play a role
internally in israeli politics
the forces who've been struggling for
peace and justice in the middle east
the force is struggling for peace and
justice in el salvador have a common
linkage
not merely in the notions of justice and
the notions of peace and the
notions of reading one's self of
oppression but in the commonality of the
enemies
and the interlocking of the various
forces that are now at work
against the oppression of all those
peoples throughout the arab world
throughout the world throughout the
african world and throughout the world
in latin america this program was
written and produced by jane hunter
and mixed by neptune overload